DOCUMENT: sources/Lecture/Introduction_to_Quantum_Computing_CH1_CH2-959373-17675280873904.pdf
TOTAL_PAGES: 18
--- PAGE 1 ---
Introduction to
Quantum Computing
Kamonluk Suksen Ph.D.
Part I Linear Algebra for Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 2 ---
Chapter 1:
What is Quantum Computing?
Kamonluk Suksen Ph.D.
2
--- PAGE 3 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
• In a classical computer, a bit is represented by a physical quantity with two states to represent 0 and 1.
▪ It can be the voltage in a circuit (states, 5 V for 1 and 0 V for 0).
▪ It can be the magnetization direction in a magnetic drive (e.g. up for 1 and down for 0).
▪ It can be the charge density in the charge storage layer in the flash memory (e.g. low for 1 and high
for 0).
• In a quantum computer, the information is represented by qubits.
• Each qubit still has two distinct states, “0” and “1” and they are orthogonal to each other because they
cannot exist with 100% certainty at the same time.
• We also call them the basis vectors or basis states.
• A qubit may also have many other states which are the superposition of the two basis states.
• The two orthogonal basis states are allowed to exist at the same time with <100% certainty.
3
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 4 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
• Superposition is one of the fundamental operation principles in quantum computing.
• Superposition allows us to perform a calculation on multiple basis states at the same time.
• We learned superposition in wave theory in which two wavelets can superimpose on each other.
• In electromagnetism, light can be polarized in any direction. Any linear polarization is just a linear
combination of horizontal and vertical polarization.
• If we represent the horizontal polarization as a horizontal vector and the vertical polarization as a vertical
vector, any linear polarization, 𝑉 is just a linear combination of the two vectors.
• where α and β are just some numbers (coefficients) and ෡
𝑉𝑥 and ෡
𝑉𝑦 are the horizontal and vertical polarization
unit vectors, respectively.
• We can write in the Dirac bra–ket notation:
𝑉 = ෡
𝑉𝑥 + ෡
𝑉𝑦
ȁ ۧ
𝑉 = ȁ ۧ
𝑉𝑥 + ห ൿ
𝑉𝑦
4
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 5 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
Classical Computing Quantum Computing
Representation of Information 0, 1, (bit) (voltage level) a|0>+b|1> (qubit) (superposition of
basis states)
Operation Principles Classical Boolean Algebra Superposition, Entanglement,
Interference
Logic Gate Usually, non-reversible Unitary, reversible
Robustness Very robust, immune to noise even at
400K
Very sensitive to noise, operating at
mK, low fault tolerance.
Measurement Can copy, deterministic No-cloning, statistical
Hardware Transistor Trapped Ions, Josephson Junction,
Topological Insulator, Photonics,
Defect Center, Electron spin, Neutral
Atoms,
Information size Process 1 n-bit state at a time May process 2n n-bit state at a time
5
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 6 ---
What is Quantum
Computing?
• Classical gates (left) are usually
non-reversible, but quantum
gates (right) have 1-to-1
correspondence between the
output and input.
￼
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing 6
--- PAGE 7 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
• Reversible Computing:
▪ In classical computing, logic gates are non-reversible.
▪ In quantum computing, every operation has to be reversible (except measurement).
▪ Quantum mechanics requires nature to evolve in a “unitary” way, and as a result, every quantum gate has to be unitary
and thus reversible.
▪ We can also regard every quantum gate as a rotation operator for a vector.
• Robustness:
▪ A classical computer is very robust against noise. We can have billions of transistors working well even at 400 K.
▪ However, a quantum computer is very sensitive to noise. Most of them need to work in the mK range. 1 mK is 1/1000 K.
▪ Liquid helium (L-He) temperature is 4.2 K. This means that the quantum computer chip needs to operate in an
environment a hundred times cooler than the L-He.
▪ This is because the thermal noise is smaller at a lower temperature. Thermal noise is proportional to temperature.
▪ Qubits are usually implemented with a physical qubit with small state energy separation (e.g. the separation of a spin
qubit’s up and down is about 0.2 meV).
▪ Therefore, low temperature is needed so that the thermal energy (noise) is much less than the state separation energy.
▪ To further mitigate the impact of noise, error correction and signal processing are very important in quantum computing.
7
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 8 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
• Measurement and Collapse:
▪ For a classical measurement, you still copy it to a register or memory.
▪ In quantum computing, there is a theory called the No Cloning Theory. It prevents us from cloning all quantum states.
▪ Therefore, we cannot copy a quantum state from one place to another place.
▪ We can also regard every quantum gate as a rotation operator for a vector.
▪ Teleportation, it seems that we can “copy” something from one place to another in no time.
▪ But in quantum teleportation, when we “copy” a state, we need to destroy the state at the source. So actually, it is not a copy action and that is why it is called teleportation.
▪ When measure a superposition state, the state will collapse to one of the basis states (0 or 1) and this is completely random.
▪ Then how a quantum computer is going to be useful if even the measurement is random?
▪ In some algorithms, we design it so that eventually it will give us a certain basis state for sure.
• Implementation of Qubits:
▪ In a quantum computer, we need something small so that quantum phenomena can exhibit.
▪ It also needs to have two distinguishable quantum states as the basis states (0 and 1).
▪ We can use spin up to represent 0 and spin down to represent 1.
▪ According to quantum mechanics, the electron can be in a superposition of spin up and spin down.
▪ Therefore, the spin of an electron under an external magnetic field can be used to implement a qubit.
▪ There are other possible qubit implementations such as trapped ions, superconducting qubit using Josephson Junction,
topological insulator, photons, defect centers in diamond or silicon carbide.
▪ There are trade-offs between them such as the size of the device, the speed, the coherence time, and scalability. 8
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 9 ---
What is Quantum Computing?
• Information Size:
▪ The power of superposition is the amount of information that can be stored when we have more than 1 qubit.
▪ How many possible states can we store with n physical bits in a classical computer?
▪ It is 2𝑛 states. Of course, we can only store one of them at a time. For example, with 2 physical bits, we can
store either the state 3 (11 in binary), 2 (10 in binary), 1 (01 in binary), or 0 (00 in binary).
▪ For quantum computers, each of the classical states becomes the basis state and they are orthogonal to each
other. So, you have 2𝑛 basis states if you have n qubits.
▪ The n-qubit system can also be in a superposition state of the 2𝑛 basis states. For example, if there are two
photon polarization qubits:
▪ where α, β, γ, and δ are just some numbers and 𝑉𝑥1, 𝑉𝑦1, 𝑉𝑥2, and 𝑉𝑦2 are the horizontal and vertical
polarization vectors of the first and the second photons, respectively.
▪ We have four basis vectors now, ȁ ۧ
𝑉𝑥1𝑉𝑥2 , ห ൿ
𝑉𝑥1𝑉𝑦2 , ห ൿ
𝑉𝑦1𝑉𝑥2 , ห ൿ
𝑉𝑦1𝑉𝑦2
▪ For 100 qubits, we can form a system of 2100 basis vectors. If we can process the 100 qubits at the same
time, we are processing the 2100 coefficients at once. This is the so-called quantum parallelism.
ȁ ۧ
𝑉 = ȁ ۧ
𝑉𝑥1𝑉𝑥2 + ห ൿ
𝑉𝑥1𝑉𝑦2 + ห ൿ
𝑉𝑦1𝑉𝑥2 + ห ൿ
𝑉𝑦1𝑉𝑦2
9
Chapter 1: What is Quantum Computing
--- PAGE 10 ---
Chapter 2:
Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
Kamonluk Suksen Ph.D.
10
--- PAGE 11 ---
A Romantic Story
• Once upon a time, there was a boy who liked a girl. But he did not know if the girl liked him. The girl
treated him patience, but he was not sure if she just treated him as a good friend or she did like him.
The boy had heard about quantum mechanics but did not understand too well. For him, the state of the
girl was:
• Definitely, ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠 (she likes him) and ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜 (she does not like him) are two orthogonal basis vectors that
never occur at the same time. For the boy, the girl is in a state which is a superposition of ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠 and
ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜 .
• The boy dared not ask because asking is a measurement. If it collapses to ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜 , that would be the end of
the world for him.
• After waiting for months, the boy lost his patience, and he decided to ask (which is a measurement by
asking “do you like me?”). Unfortunately, the state collapsed to ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜 ! The problem is once the answer is
“No,” it is “No” forever.
• Fortunately, the boy did not collapse psychologically. He turned his attention to study and understood
quantum mechanics better. He realized that in a quantum system, even if the state has collapsed to a
basis state of a certain basis, when you measure in another basis, it will collapse to a basis state of the
new basis, which is a superposition of the old basis states.
ȁ ۧ
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑔𝑖𝑟𝑙 = ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠 + ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜
11
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 12 ---
A Romantic Story
• For him, the old basis was formed by
• where ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝐿 and ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿 are the answers to the question “Do you like me?”
• The girl’s state can also be expressed as a superposition of the basis states on another basis.
• For example, the new basis can have the basis states ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠 and ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜 to the question “Do you want to
work on a project with me?”. The new basis states can be labeled as ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑃 and ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝑃
• This is because a girl who does not like him may or may not want to work on a project with him. So
ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿 can coexist with ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑃 or ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝑃 . There are not orthogonal to each other.
• Therefore, after a measurement in the new basis, the state may collapse to ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑃 is not orthogonal to
ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝐿 or ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿 , we may have:
• What if he tried again to measure in the old basis, i.e. ask her if she likes him, there is a chance he will
get ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝐿 !
ȁ ۧ
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑔𝑖𝑟𝑙 = ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝐿 + ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿
ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑃 = ȁ ۧ
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝐿 + ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿
12
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 13 ---
Vectors in Quantum Computing
• Quantum computing is just a manipulation of vectors through operations in the vector space.
• We prepare many vectors in a special way and manipulate them through special quantum gates
(operations) and we get the answer we want.
• These operations are also just rotations of vectors in hyperspaces.
• On a 2D plane, we know a vector can be described by its x and y.
• For example, in Pic. 1, we have a vector Ԧ
𝑣 = 3 ො
𝑥 + 2 ො
𝑦 =
3
2 where ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦 are the unit vectors in the 𝑥
and 𝑦 directions. ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦 are just the basis vectors.
• In quantum computing, vector and state are the same. We can also write Ԧ
𝑣 in Dirac’s bra-ket notation, as
well:
• We can also choose another set of basis vectors, ෡
𝑥′ and ෡
𝑦′.
ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦 are only half
of the lengths of ෡
𝑥′ and ෡
𝑦′, respectively. So that we can represent Ԧ
𝑣 as follow:
ȁ ۧ
Ԧ
𝑣 = 3ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑥 + 2ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑦
￼
ȁ ۧ
Ԧ
𝑣 = 3ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑥 + 2ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑦 = 3 2ห ൿ
෡
𝑥′ + 2 2ห ൿ
෡
𝑦′
= 6ห ൿ
෡
𝑥′ + 4ห ൿ
෡
𝑦′
=
6
4 Pic 1: Representations of ȁ ۧ
Ԧ
𝑣 in two different bases. 13
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 14 ---
Vectors Space
• All vectors on a plane can be expressed as a linear combination of the basis vectors ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦 with the
form Ԧ
𝑣 = 3 ො
𝑥 + 2 ො
𝑦 =
3
2 . We say that the basis vectors form or span that vector space.
• For a vector that is out of the plane, it can’t be expressed as a linear combination of ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦.
We say that this out-of-plane vector is in another vector space.
• For example, you bought a dozen eggs. You say you have 12 1-eggs. The basis vector is 1-egg and it
spans the whole vector space of eggs.
• Any number of eggs can be represented as a linear combination of 1-egg (here we only have 1 basis
vector).
• If you have a dozen apples, you cannot say you have 12 1-eggs because 1-egg does not span the vector
space of apples.
• Basically, we are saying we do not have the same vector space and we are not in the same universe.
14
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 15 ---
Inner Products of Vectors
• Vector and state are equivalent. So, we can represent every physical system state as a vector.
• The inner product is an important operation of vectors, which is also called the “dot product” or “scalar product’’, the physical meaning of the inner product is projection.
• Projection is an important concept in quantum mechanics.
• In every measurement, we can say we try to do an operation to project a superposition state to one of the basis
states.
• For example, when the boys asked (a measurement) the girl if she liked him and she answered no, the wavefunction is collapsed (projected) into the ȁ ۧ
𝑁𝑜𝐿 basis state.
• The angle between 𝑣1 and the 𝑥-axis (which has the same direction as ො
𝑥) is 30°
.
• The angle between 𝑣2 and the 𝑥-axis is 45°. So, the angle between 𝑣1 and 𝑣2 is 15°
.
• From trigonometry, the inner product of the two vectors is 𝑣1. 𝑣2 = 𝑣1 𝑣2 cos 15°
,
where 𝑣1 and 𝑣2 are the magnitudes (lengths) of 𝑣1 and 𝑣2, respectively.
• Using the Pythagorean theorem, 𝑣1 = 3
2
+ 12 = 2 and 𝑣2 = 12 + 12 = 2.
• Therefore, 𝑣1. 𝑣2 = 𝑣1 𝑣2 cos 15° = 2 2 cos 15° ≈ 2.732. This is the length
if we project 𝑣1 onto 𝑣2 and scaled by 𝑣2.
• The inner product is telling us how much the two vectors have in common after being scaled by their magnitudes (lengths). We can only use it if the basis vectors
are orthonormal.
Pic 2: Graphical representations of the
inner product of 𝑣1 and 𝑣2. The final
result needs to be scaled by 𝑣2.
￼
15
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 16 ---
Inner Products of Vectors
• Since we can write all vectors in the column form if the basis vectors are known.
• For example:
• To perform the dot product of 𝑣1. 𝑣2, firstly, we have to rotate the column form of the first vector anti-
clockwise by 90°, so that it becomes a row vector. And then we can perform matrix multiplication.
• The answer is exactly the same as 𝑣1. 𝑣2 = 𝑣1 𝑣2 cos 15°
.
• In general, if 𝑣1 =
𝑎
𝑏 and 𝑣2 =
𝑐
𝑑 , we have 𝑣1. 𝑣2 = 𝑎∗ 𝑏∗ 𝑐
𝑑
= 𝑎∗ × 𝑐 + 𝑏∗ × 𝑑
where 𝑎∗ and 𝑏∗ are the complex conjugate of 𝑎 and 𝑏, respectively.
• The coefficients in the linear combination of basis vectors can be complex numbers.
ȁ ۧ
𝑣1 = 3ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑥 + 1ȁ ۧ
ො
𝑦 =
3
1
ȁ ۧ
𝑣2 = 1ȁ ۧො
𝑥 + 1ȁ ۧො
𝑦 =
1
1
𝑣1. 𝑣2 = 3 1
1
1
= 3 × 1 + 1 × 1 = 3 + 1 ≈ 2.732
16
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 17 ---
Higher Dimensional Vector Space
• When there are two basis vectors, it spans a two-dimensional (2D) vector space, just like ො
𝑥 and ො
𝑦 span a
plane.
• If we add Ƹ𝑧, the third basis vector in the height direction, they then span a 3D space.
• If we have n basis vectors, we expect they will span an n-D space.
• Any vector 𝑣𝑎 must be a linear combination of the n basis vectors.
where 𝑎0 to 𝑎𝑛−1 are the n coefficients and ෞ
𝑣0 to ෟ
𝑣𝑛−1 are the n basis vectors. The coefficients may be
complex numbers.
• And for another vector,
where 𝑏0 to 𝑏𝑛−1 are the n coefficients which can be real or complex.
• The inner product of the two vectors is
𝑣𝑎 = 𝑎0
ෞ
𝑣0 + 𝑎1
ෞ
𝑣1 + 𝑎2ෞ
𝑣2 + ⋯ + 𝑎𝑛−1
ෟ
𝑣𝑛−1
𝑣𝑏 = 𝑏0
ෞ
𝑣0 + 𝑏1
ෞ
𝑣1 + 𝑏2ෞ
𝑣2 + ⋯ + 𝑏𝑛−1
ෟ
𝑣𝑛−1
𝑣𝑎. 𝑣𝑏 = 𝑎0
∗ 𝑎1
∗
… 𝑎𝑛−1
∗
𝑏0
1
:
𝑏𝑛−1
= 𝑎0
∗ × 𝑏0 + 𝑎1
∗ × 𝑏1 + ⋯ + 𝑎𝑛−1
∗ × 𝑏𝑛−1
17
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
--- PAGE 18 ---
Summary
• Vectors are states and vectors are linear combinations of basis vectors.
• The basis vectors can be something very abstract (e.g. spin up) or absurd (1-apple).
• The coefficients in the linear combination can be complex numbers.
• We also reviewed the meaning and methodology of calculating the inner product of two vectors.
• All these concepts apply to higher dimensions.
18
Chapter 2: Basis, Basis Vectors, and Inner Product
